Residual confounding background (#1130)
ihmeuw/vivarium_research: docs/source/model_design/vivarium_model_components/risk_factors/residual_confounding/index.rst

.. _residual_confounding:

=====================
Residual confounding
=====================

.. contents::
  :local:

Background and motivation
-------------------------

As discussed on the :ref:`risk-risk correlation page <risk_correlation>`, risk exposures 
are frequently correlated at the individual level, with vulnerable populations often 
experiencing a disproportionate share of risk exposure across several risk factors. 
Examples include high body mass index and high fasting plasma glucose, tobacco smoking 

> and alcohol use, childhood height and weight, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and alcohol use, childhood height and weight.
```

Plenty of examples here, no need to have the "etc"

Therefore, if we are interested in the effect of a given risk factor (R1) on an outcome, 
there are often many other risk factors (R2, R3, ... RN) that may be correlated with R1 
and also have an effect on the outcome (as shown in the figure below). Notably, these 
"other" risk factors (R2 through RN) meet the definitions of confounding factors in the 

> association between R1 and the outcome (see :ref:`this page <general_dags>` for more 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
association between R1 and the outcome (see :ref:`General DAGs <general_dags>` for more 
```

information on confounding).

.. image:: diagram.png
    :align: center

.. note::

  Some of the R2 through RN risk factors may be known, measured, and documented in the 
  literature. However, many likely remain unknown, unmeasured, and/or undocumented. 
  Remember that the burden of proof for causality is high and many such associations may 
  exist but have not yet been studied thoroughly enough to meet such a threshold. Such 
  unknown risks still represent important factors with regard to residual confounding.

The presence of such factors that are associated with R1 and the outcome causes the 
*observed* association between R1 and the outcome in a population (sometimes referred to 
as correlation, crude association, or unadjusted association) to be different from the 
*causal* association between R1 and the outcome (sometimes referred to as the adjusted 
association). 

>   In other words, if we were to stratify a population based on R1 risk exposure, the 

Reviewer 2: Is the indentation here intentional?

  difference in the outcome rates between the exposed and unexposed groups would not 
  equal the difference in outcome rates that would be observed among the exposed 
  population at baseline and if we were to entirely remove their exposure, making them 
  unexposed (perhaps through some hypothetical "cure" for the exposure). 

.. todo::

>   Demonstrate this mathematically or schematically somehow... any ideas?

Reviewer: You can cook up a dramatic example if R2 is a common cause of R1 and the outcome, e.g. R2 = smoking, outcome = lung cancer, and R1 is something else caused by smoking (I'm having trouble thinking of the right thing now... maybe drinking coffee?)

Therefore, we will represent residual confounding moving forward as the "RC" variable 
in the diagram below. Here, R1 through RN represent a group of *modeled* risk factors 
that affect outcome O with *modeled* correlation between them. RC represents the 
aggregate impact of all other unmodeled (including known and unknown) factors that are 
associated with risks R1 through RN and have an influence on outcome O. 

.. image:: rc_diagram.png
    :align: center

.. note:: 

  The nature and influence of the RC factor depends on the risks included in the risk 
  set of R1 through RN: as we remove the Nth risk from this set, its influence will be 
  included in the RC factor and as we add an Nth + 1 factor to the set, its influence 
  will be removed from the RC factor.

Whether we are modeling just one or many risk factors in our R1 through RN risk set, 
the presence of RC can have a significant influence on our models, through the 
following mechanisms:

1. Bias in estimating the PAF of modeled risk factors on an outcome of interest. The 
influence of this type of bias is described on the :ref:`population attributable 
fraction page <pafs>`.

> 2. Bias in estimating the absolute change in an outcome rate associated with a change 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Bias in estimating the absolute change in an outcome rate caused by a change 
```
Maybe?
